In this video we will look at 6 hard
surface techniques that changed how I worked.
I have been creating 3D work
professionally for 20 years now, that is
to say I have come across my fair share
of hard surface challenges.
In this video I am going to share some of
my top techniques that I wish I had known
years earlier and that have saved me
hours and hours of frustration.
Hard surfaces usually feature a lot of
flat surfaces with right angles mainly
due to the not overly malleable materials involved.
I am thinking metal, wood and plastic.
However, these things can still be bent,
cut and moulded into curved shapes.
Lets take this design for example.
We could start with a very high poly
mesh, but what we gain in resolution we
lose in control, even with proportional editing.
So lets look at keeping this mesh density
super low and controllable while having
this high resolution smooth outcome.
So lets move this aside and I am just
going to shift and right click to drop
the cursor and shift a cylinder.
We only need about 16 vertices here.
Jumping into edit mode lets scale along
the Y, something like that looks good.
And in poly select lets do top and
bottom, eye to inset and then right click
bridge faces.
Lets just move it out the way a little bit.
There we go.
Now we have some larger bevels here, so
lets just go into edge mode, select
these, bevel, that looks good.
Maybe lets increase it a tad.
And one on the inside here and bevel.
Cool, that looks good.
Now for the front section here we can
select these group of polygons, like so.
Hit E to extrude out, scale down along
the Y, lets move it back a little bit.
And then assuming you have loop tools
enabled, which you may need to do so from
the addons menu in the preferences, we
can right click, loop tools, circle.
I am just going to scale that down, hit
extrude, inset with I and then one more extrude
to go in
.
Ok, we have roughly the same shape but
with very low polys.
Now lets look at how we can make it nice
and smooth, but with hard edges.
Firstly, lets add a subd modifier with
CTRL and 3.
We have the smooth down, but not the hard
edges, so lets go into edit mode and lets
select one of the edges in edge mode.
And we can use SHIFT G and then face
angles to select edges with the adjacent
faces at a certain angle, which we can
dial in here, but that looks good to me.
So lets SHIFT E to create the crease,
looks good.
We need a few more creases here, so
again, lets select that edge, face angle and
SHIFT E.
Ok, cool.
Now we also have a couple more edges here
that we need to select to match this
style and underneath we don't have any
sharpness at all, so lets just select
that edge loop with ALT, SHIFT E again
and reduce to nothing, just make sure
that is minus 1.
I'm just going to move this edge up a
little bit to match.
Ok, cool, now we have the nice sharp
edges, so lets just shade smooth and see
what we've got here.
Just going to hide all of the wireframes
with ALT SHIFT and Z to switch off the overlays.
Its looking ok, but its not quite as nice
and creased as this one, so lets add a
bevel as well.
Go into edit mode, select one of the
edges with a crease on, and if we SHIFT
and G, we can select all of the creases
and then CTRL and E, edge bevel, and
we'll just add an edge bevel weight of 1.
Now we can add a modifier, search for
bevel, limit method to weight, that
weight we just created, shading, harden normals.
Now if we switch off our overlays, we
have a really nice look with nice sharp edges.
Lets say you're being a productivity
wizard and you're only working on half of
your model, knowing you can add a mirror modifier.
If we were to do so now, you can see that
we have odd pinching here and its not
looking particularly nice, and this is
because our mirror modifier is happening
after the fact.
Thankfully there is quite a cool way you
can remedy this, and that is because as
of 4 .2 you can pin modifiers.
So if we select bevel for example, we can
pin to last, and likewise on our subdivision.
Now if we add our mirror modifier, it
happens before our pinned items in the stack.
Really handy.
Now this one took me far too long to
realise, I'm sure a lot of you know you
can add cables by going into a curve,
adding say a bezier curve, going into the
curve options and geometry under depth,
just cranking things up a little bit like so.
However, I used to then go in and start
manipulating these points and try and
snap and rotate and arrange things, and
it just took a little too long.
And I find it considerably easier to just
select all and delete all vertices, jump
in to the draw mode and draw from the cursor.
Now if we go into orthographic here, I'm
just going to snap the side, lets go to
wireframe, we can draw the curve that we
want, something like that looks good.
And you can see that the calculation of
the bezier handles is already pretty good
and only needs a little bit of clean up
to finish.
On a side note, you can also go into edit
mode and just check surface and now you
can draw your cables all over your
geometry and it sticks nicely to it like so.
Right angle joins like this appear quite
a lot for me, particularly in hard
surface modelling for handles and the like.
Thankfully its quite easy to put together
if you have your two cylinders here in
place and they are joined into one
object, we can select the edges here,
right click and then go to bridge edge loops.
And then under number of cuts, you can
add say 5 and adjust the smoothness
factor to your liking.
And done.
Some things are just painful to add to
existing geometry without having to
seriously mess up your beautiful
underlying base mesh, so why not just
stick it on top.
Well, lets look at how to set that up.
Firstly, this is the item we want to
stick on the underside of our craft here,
just like a pulse engine of sorts.
Firstly, we need to make sure our origin
point is snapped to the bottom, so I'm
just going to go into edit mode, edge,
select the loop with ALT and left click,
and then snap our cursor to it with SHIFT
and S.
Hitting tab to go back out into object
mode, we can go to object, set origin,
origin to 3D cursor.
Now under our snap options here, we can
make sure we are on face and align
rotation to target.
And that affords us the ability to just
hit G, hold down control and snap our
item on the underside like so.
Now this isn't hugely convincing as a
join here, but we're only just getting
started, so to make it a little bit more
convincing, we can go into edit mode and
select these outer polys, go over to our
vertex options, create a new vertex
group, let's just leave it called group,
and click assign.
Now if we jump out into object mode and
move over to our modifiers, we can add a
new modifier, and search for shrink wrap.
Let's move it to the top of the stack.
Now we can select our target, the main
base of the ship here, and restrict this
effect by that vertex group we just created.
Now we can duplicate this over the bottom
to our hearts content.
Now I'm sure some of you can see that the
join here is still quite abrupt,
particularly in rendered mode, and it's
not really fooling anyone.
Thankfully we can use the normal data
from the object which we are stuck to and
apply it to this object.
And to do so, with the object selected,
we can go add modifier, search for data
transfer, select our source object, and
go down to face corner data, let's just
expand that, and we want the custom
normals, and the option we want is
nearest face interpolated, and I find
this to be the smoothest result.
And as you can see, it looks like it
almost doesn't exist at all with some
very light shading.
Thankfully we can once again take
advantage of our vertex group to isolate
the effect, and now you can see,
particularly compared to the old method,
it looks considerably better.
So let's just shift select all the
remaining items, and then the item with
the data transfer, and then go to this
little dropdown here, and copy to selected.
Excellent.
I hope some of these techniques have
helped, now this model was built
exclusively to demo most of these
techniques, but if you had fun and you'd
be interested in learning something a
little bit more, then you might like
Robotic Planet, a full robot creation
course over at CG Boost Academy.
We walk through entire robot creations as
well as tackling even more tips and tricks.
Enrolling in the course also gives you
access to the CG Boost community where
you can comment, share ideas, or get help
on particular parts of the course.